A Flea in Her Ear () is a play by Georges Feydeau written in 1907, at the height of the Belle Époque. The author called it a vaudeville, but in Anglophone countries, where it is the most popular of Feydeau's plays, it is usually described as a farce.Bermel, Albert. "farce", The Oxford Encyclopedia of Theatre and Performance, Oxford University Press, 2003. Retrieved 1 August 2020 ; and Baldick, Chris. "farce" The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms, Oxford University Press, 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2020 The plot hinges on the central characters having a double: a middle class businessman is indistinguishable from the hall porter of a shady hotel, and the two are persistently mistaken for each other, to the bafflement of both. ==Premiere== The play was first performed at the Théâtre des Nouveautés, Paris, on 2 March 1907.Stoullig, pp. 409 and 418 Les Annales du théâtre et de la musique said of the play, "It is a piece for which we need to invent a new description: funny, pleasing, comical, frenzied, dizzying, it is all those, and more. The action goes forward with such velocity, explosiveness, prestissimo, from start to finish that the actors and the audience cannot catch their breath for even a second."Stoullig, pp. 409–410 The play seemed set to rival the run of Feydeau's greatest success, La Dame de chez Maxim (1899, 579 performances) but was cut short by the sudden death of the actor playing Camille Chandebise, and was taken off after 86 performances.Gidel, p. 202Stoullig, p. 413 ===Original cast=== thumb|upright=1.9|alt=stage scene with characters in early 20th- century dress in scene of frantic confusion|Act 2, 1907: Poche (Germain) being extracted by Lucienne (Suzanne Carlix) from bedroom to lobby as Homenidès de Histangua (Milo de Meyer) shoots at him. Torin, the actor whose sudden death curtailed the run, is sitting on the bed. *Raymonde Chandebise – Armande Cassive *Lucienne – Suzanne Carlix *Olympe – Rosine Maurel *Eugénie – Jenny Rose *Antoinette – Mlle Gense *Victor-Emmanuel Chandebise/Poche – Alexandre Germain *Camille Chandebise – Joseph Torin *Finache – Emmanuel Matrat *Ferraillon – M. Landrin *Tournel – Marcel Simon *Homenidès de Histangua – Milo de Meyer *Etienne – Paul Ardot *Batistin – Roger Gaillard *Rugby – M. Roberty ::Source: Les Annales du théâtre et de la musique.Stoullig, p. 409 ==Plot== The play is set in Paris at the turn of the 20th century. Raymonde Chandebise, after years of wedded bliss, begins to doubt the fidelity of her husband, Victor Emmanuel, who has suddenly become sexually inactive. Raymonde is unaware that his behaviour is due to a nervous condition. She confides her doubts to her old friend Lucienne, who suggests a trick to test him. They write him a letter, in Lucienne's handwriting, from a fictitious and anonymous admirer, requesting a rendezvous at the Hotel Coq d'Or, an establishment with a dubious reputation, but a large and prominent clientele. Raymonde intends to confront her husband there, and she and Lucienne leave to do so. When Victor Emmanuel receives the letter he has no interest in such an affair and believes the invitation from the mysterious woman was meant for his best friend Tournel, a handsome bachelor. Unknown to Victor Emmanuel, Tournel has his eye on Raymonde and eagerly exits to make the appointment. Camille, the young nephew of Victor Emmanuel, is overjoyed to have his speech impediment corrected by a new silver palate from Dr Finache. In celebration, he and the household cook, Antoinette, also hurry to the Hotel Coq d'Or, followed by Etienne, Antoinette's jealous husband. Dr Finache decides to go to the hotel in search of his own afternoon rendezvous. thumb|left|alt=drawing of two identical men staring at each other|Poche (left) and Victor-Emmanuel Victor Emmanuel shows the letter to Lucienne's husband, Carlos Homenides de Histangua, a passionate and violent Spaniard. Carlos recognises Lucienne's handwriting and assumes that she is trying to start an affair with Victor Emmanuel. He runs off to the hotel, vowing to kill her. Victor Emmanuel, hoping to prevent the threatened murder, hurries off in pursuit. The various characters arrive in search of their goals: Finache for fun; Raymonde for Victor Emmanuel; Tournel for Raymonde; Camille with Antoinette, followed by Etienne; Carlos for Lucienne; and Victor Emmanuel to stop Carlos. Carlos, attempting to kill his wife, shoots at anything that moves. Victor Emmanuel sees Raymonde talking with Tournel and believes she is unfaithful. Victor Emmanuel is believed to be insane when Poche, an alcoholic porter at the hotel who is a dead ringer for Victor Emmanuel, is mistaken for him. Camille loses his palate, and Tournel tries very hard to seduce Raymonde. The confusion persists even after all are reunited again at Victor Emmanuel's house. Things begin to clear up when Carlos discovers a rough copy of the letter written by Lucienne on Raymonde's desk, this one in Raymonde's handwriting. The owner of the hotel comes by to return an article left behind by a member of the household and clears up the confusion between his porter and Victor Emmanuel. Finally, Raymonde tells Victor Emmanuel the cause of her suspicions, and he assures her that he will put an end to her doubts—tonight. ==Performance history== The first revival, forty-five years after the first production, was at the Théâtre Montparnasse, Paris, on 14 November 1952, directed by Georges Vitaly, with Pierre Mondy in the dual role of Victor-Emmanuel and Poche."La Puce à l’oreille", Les Archives du spectacle. Retrieved 1 August 2020 The play was revived at Les Célestins, Théâtre de Lyon in 1953 in Vitaly's production, and again in 1968, directed by Jacques Charon.Puce à l’oreille", Les Archives du spectacle. Retrieved 1 August 2020 The play was admitted to the repertoire of the Comédie-Française in Paris in December 1978, directed by Jean-Laurent Cochet, with Jean Le Poulain in the lead.Puce à l’oreille", Les Archives du spectacle. Retrieved 1 August 2020 It has subsequently been produced at least fifteen times in Paris and other French cities.Puce à l’oreille", Les Archives du spectacle. Retrieved 1 August 2020 Although La Dame de chez Maxim remains the favourite with French audiences, in English-speaking countries A Flea in Her Ear has become the most popular of Feydeau's plays.Pronko, pp. 1 and 13Hacht and Hayes, p. 591 In Britain a lightly bowdlerised adaptation called You Never Know Y'know played at the Criterion Theatre, London, in 1918,"You Never Know Y'know", The Times, 21 June 1918, p. 9 and ran for 351 performances.Gaye, p. 1540 In 1966 John Mortimer translated the play for the National Theatre, at the Old Vic. The production was directed by Charon and starred Albert Finney."French Producer for Farce", The Times, 21 January 1966; and "M. Charon on the Feydeau Behind the Farces", The Times, 3 February 1966, p. 18 Mortimer's translation has twice been restaged at the same theatre, first in an unsuccessful production by Richard Jones, starring Jim Broadbent, in 1989,Billington, Michael. "Designer farce", The Guardian, 10 August 1989, p. 24; Ratcliffe, Michael, "Sweat and sadism", The Observer, 13 August 1989, p. 38; Hepple, Peter. "Farce impressions last", The Stage, 17 August 1989, p. 40; Sherrin, Ned. "Alas, no singing hinnies", The Times, 19 August 1989, p. 26 and in 2010–11 in a successful one by Richard Eyre, starring Tom Hollander.Billington, Michael. " A Flea in Her Ear", The Guardian, 15 December 2010 In Australia the play was presented in Melbourne in 1967 by the Union Theatre Repertory Company."Amusements", The Age, 18 January 1967, p. 48 The Sydney Theatre Company presented the play in 2016 at the Sydney Opera House Drama Theatre in a new adaptation by Andrew Upton. In the US the play was given on Broadway in October 1969, in a production by Gower Champion, with Robert Gerringer as Victor-Emmanuel and Poche."A Flea in Her Ear", Internet Broadway Database. Retrieved 1 August 2020 A new adaptation by David Ives was commissioned by the Chicago Shakespeare Theater and first performed on 10 March 2006.A Flea in her Ear by David Ives (Dramatists Play Service; 2006) p. 2, retrieved from Google Books 6 October 2012 In Serbia a production of the play (as Buba u uhu) opened at the Teatar Bojan Stupica, Belgrade, in June 1971 and, at May 2016, had been running continuously ever since. At 1,700 performances this was the longest theatrical run in the country's history."A Flea in Her Ear", SBS Serbian. Retrieved 2 August 2020 As "Ψύλλοι στ' αυτιά" (Psili St' Aftia), the play was premiered in Greece in 1976, directed by Dinos Iliopoulos, and has been revived in productions by Minos Volanakis (1984 and 1998), George Kimoulis (2006) and Yannis Kakleas (2013)."Ψύλλοι στ' αυτιά", RetroDB, retrieved 1 August 2020 ===Television=== The 1966 National Theatre production was televised by the BBC in 1967. By this time Finney had left the cast and the dual lead role was taken by Robert Lang." The National Theatre Company: A Flea in her Ear", BBC Genome. Retrieved 1 August 2020 ===Film=== John Mortimer wrote the screenplay for a 1968 20th Century Fox feature film directed by Jacques Charon. The cast included Rex Harrison, Rosemary Harris, Louis Jourdan, and Rachel Roberts.Canby, Vincent. "Screen: 'Flea in Her Ear':Charon Directs Movie of a Play by Feydeau", The New York Times, 28 November 1968, p. 10 ==References== ==Sources== * * * * * Category:1907 plays Category:Plays by Georges Feydeau Category:Comedy plays Category:French plays adapted into films Category:Paris in fiction Category:Broadway plays Category:Belle Époque