The A Line (formerly, from 1990 to 2019, and colloquially known as the Blue Line) is a light rail line running north–south between Azusa and Long Beach, California, passing through Irwindale, Duarte, Monrovia, Arcadia, Pasadena, South Pasadena, Northeast Los Angeles, Downtown Los Angeles, South Los Angeles, Watts, Willowbrook, Compton, Rancho Dominguez, and Long Beach in Los Angeles County. It is one of the six lines in the Los Angeles Metro Rail system. Opened in 1990, it is the system's oldest line with an estimated 22.38 million boardings per year . It is operated by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (LACMTA). The line is the longest standard-gauge light rail service in the world. == Service description == === Route description === The A Line runs between Azusa and Downtown Long Beach and has 44 stations. It is the longest light rail line in the world. The line's northern terminus is at APU/Citrus College station just west of Citrus Avenue and the two universities. The line runs west through Azusa before stopping at Azusa Downtown station at Azusa Avenue, north of Foothill Boulevard, near the downtown shops and government buildings. Continuing west, the line crosses over the I-210 freeway and runs parallel to it, entering Irwindale before stopping at Irwindale station at Irwindale Avenue. After this station, the line continues west, crossing over the San Gabriel River and underneath the I-605 freeway, diverging from I-210 and entering Duarte, before stopping at Duarte/City of Hope station located on the north side of Duarte Road, across from the City of Hope National Medical Center. Continuing west, the line parallels Duarte Road, entering Monrovia, before diverging northwest just before arriving at Monrovia station. In this area, the line runs adjacent to single-family homes. Entering Arcadia, the train crosses all street crossings on bridges except for First Avenue at the at-grade Arcadia station. Continuing west, the line reconverges with and enters the median of I-210 and continues west to Sierra Madre Villa station in Pasadena. Six stations serve different parts of Pasadena, with three of them in the freeway's median. In Old Pasadena, the line travels underground for almost half a mile, passing under Pasadena's main thoroughfare, Colorado Boulevard, which makes the Memorial Park station below grade. The station serves most of Pasadena's fine dining, shops, malls, and civic center. The Pasadena City Hall is visible upon exiting the station. The line continues south through downtown Pasadena and South Pasadena, primarily at grade. North of Highland Park, the route crosses over the Arroyo Seco Parkway (State Route 110) via the grand Santa Fe Arroyo Seco Railroad Bridge towards Highland Park. After Highland Park station, the train runs in the median of Marmion Way, where trains go at only . After 50th Avenue, the L Line operated primarily at grade in its own right of way, except for a short underpass below Figueroa Street. From here, the route continues, with a handful of stations serving the hillside communities north of downtown, including Lincoln Heights, Mount Washington, the Southwest Museum of the American Indian. Northeast of Chinatown, the line crosses over the Los Angeles River on an elevated viaduct. Continuing on the elevated viaduct, the line stops at Chinatown station before arriving at Union Station. This entire section of the line north of Union Station follows the current and former right-of-way of the Pasadena Subdivision. At Union Station, riders can transfer to other trains and modes. Transfers include: *The B and D rapid transit lines. *The J bus rapid transit line. *Other bus services. *Metrolink commuter rail. *Amtrak inter-city services. When the route used to be the L Line, trains went toward Atlantic station in East Los Angeles. Trains now use a new tunnel constructed via the Regional Connector Transit Project underneath downtown, which connects with the original A Line at 7th Street/Metro Center station. In Little Tokyo, the line enters the new tunnel north of Temple Street to serve the replacement underground Little Tokyo/Arts District station, where the route merges with the E Line. The lines turn to run under 2nd Street and the 2nd Street Tunnel, as well as the B and D lines, with clearances as low as . The new tunnel ends at the north end of 7th Street/Metro Center station, the previous terminal built in the early 1990s, and the line continues south under Flower Street. After rising to street level, the A and E Lines run south along Flower Street. Passengers can connect to the bus rapid transit J Line at 7th Street/Metro Center, Pico, and Grand stations. The two lines diverge at Flower Street and Washington Boulevard. E Line trains continue south along Flower Street. At the same time, the A Line turns east onto Washington Boulevard before turning south into the former Pacific Electric right-of-way at Long Beach Avenue. This historic rail corridor has four tracks, two for A Line trains and two for freight trains. Along the corridor, there are some flyovers to either eliminate grade crossings in more densely populated areas or pass over diverging freight tracks. Passengers can connect with the C Line at the Willowbrook/Rosa Parks station. Just south of Willow station, A Line trains exit the rail corridor and begin street running in the median of Long Beach Boulevard into the city of Long Beach, where trains travel through the Long Beach Transit Mall while making a loop using 1st Street, Pacific Avenue, and 8th Street. === Hours and frequency === Time 4-5A 6-7A 8A-1P 2-6P 7P 8-11P Weekdays 10-21 10 12 10 10-20 20 Weekends/Holidays 20 10-20 12 20 === Speed === As listed on the official timetable, trains take two hours minutes to travel the length of the line, an average speed of . === Station listing === The following is the complete list of stations, from north to south. Station Date Opened City/Neighborhood Major connections and notes March 5, 2016 Azusa Park and ride: 200 spaces Park and ride: 521 spaces Irwindale Park and ride: 350 spaces Duarte Park and ride: 125 spaces Monrovia Park and ride: 350 spaces Arcadia Park and ride: 300 spaces July 26, 2003 Pasadena Park and ride: 965 spaces Park and ride: 22 spaces Park and ride: 610 spaces Park and ride: 155 spaces South Pasadena Park and ride: 142 spaces Los Angeles (Highland Park) Los Angeles (Mount Washington) Los Angeles (Montecito Heights) Park and ride: 129 spaces Los Angeles (Lincoln Heights/Cypress Park) Park and ride: 94 spaces Los Angeles (Chinatown) Los Angeles (Downtown) Amtrak, LAX FlyAway and Metrolink Paid parking: 3,000 spaces November 15, 2009 Los Angeles (Little Tokyo/Arts District) June 16, 2023 Los Angeles (Downtown) February 15, 1991 July 14, 1990 South Los Angeles Florence Florence-Graham Park and ride: 116 spaces Watts Park and ride: 64 spaces Willowbrook Willowbrook Park and ride: 234 spaces Compton Park and ride: 288 spaces Carson Park and ride: 362 spaces Long Beach Park and ride: 139 spaces Park and ride: 927 spaces (southbound only) September 1, 1990 (southbound only) (northbound only) (northbound only) === Ridership === Year Ridership 2009 — 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Source: Metro == History == thumb|LA Metro Blue Line (now A Line) opening celebration on July 14, 1990 === Long Beach Line === Much of the current A Line follows the route of the Pacific Electric's Long Beach Line, which ended service in 1961. The old route gave the new light rail trains a private right-of-way between and stations allowing them to reach higher speeds between stops. The line initially opened as the Blue Line on Saturday, July 14, 1990, for US$877 million (equivalent to $ in adjusted for inflation), and ran from to . The Long Beach Loop section to opened in September 1990, followed by the tunnel into in February 1991. The route was a success, and from 1999 to 2001, the Blue Line underwent a US$11 million project to lengthen 19 of its platforms so that they could accommodate three-car trains. Plans were also made to extend the Blue Line north to Pasadena, but the connection across downtown was deferred, and the northern portion opened as the Gold Line in 2003. That original plan for the Blue Line became a reality when the Regional Connector was announced in 2009. Ground was broken for the Regional Connector across downtown in 2014, and it opened on June 16, 2023. The Blue Line was renovated in 2019, with the southern half of the line being closed for the first five months and the northern half closing for the following five months (10 months total). Metro provided a bus shuttle service to compensate for the lack of rail service. Metro officially reopened the line on November 2, 2019, rebranding it as the A Line. === Pasadena Blue Line === Much of the L Line's right-of-way through the San Gabriel Valley was built by the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Valley Railroad in 1885, eventually taken over by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway, as part of the Pasadena Subdivision, which saw Amtrak service until 1994, when construction began on the conversion to light rail. The project was initially called the "Pasadena Metro Blue Line." Planners envisioned extending the existing Blue Line from Long Beach. Still, when a ban on sales tax spending on subway tunnels passed in 1998, the project became a separate line terminating at . The now-renamed Gold Line, between Union Station and Sierra Madre Villa station in East Pasadena, opened on July 26, 2003. === Foothill Extension === Phase 2A (the section between LA and Pasadena was Phase 1) of the Foothill Extension, running between Sierra Madre Villa and station in Azusa, opened on March 5, 2016. === Regional Connector === The Regional Connector Transit Project constructed a light rail tunnel across Downtown Los Angeles that connected the L Line with the A and E lines. The project finally completed the late 1990s vision of the "Pasadena Blue Line," connecting the northern (Union Station–Azusa) segment of the L Line to the A Line (formerly the Blue Line), which ran between Los Angeles and Long Beach. The southern (Pico/Aliso–East LA) segment was combined with the existing E Line between Downtown Los Angeles and Santa Monica. The new east–west line kept the E Line name but uses the L Line's gold color. The at-grade Little Tokyo/Arts District station was demolished in 2020 and was rebuilt as a subway station approximately south and on the opposite side of Alameda from its former location. With this project completed, service was simplified into the following configuration: * A Line ** The northeastern segment of the L Line (north of ) became an extension to the previously existing A Line. ** The Foothill Extension Project was also absorbed into the A Line, which would extend it further to Pomona–North station upon its completion in 2025. * E Line ** The southern portion of the current L Line to the Eastside was combined with the existing E Line, which kept the E Line name but now uses the L Line's gold color. The groundbreaking for constructing the Regional Connector occurred on September 30, 2014, and opened on June 16, 2023. == Future developments == === Foothill Extension === Phase 2B of the Foothill Extension, running between APU/Citrus College station in Azusa and the Pomona–North Metrolink station in Pomona, is currently under construction, with a current estimated completion in the summer of 2025. This extension, like the original Gold Line to Pasadena, and the first phase of the Foothill Extension is being built by a specialized construction authority, independent of Metro. The original plan called for the extension to end at Montclair in San Bernardino County, but budget challenges forced the construction authority to cut the line back to Pomona. It is served by the A Line due to the completion of the Regional Connector project on June 16, 2023. == Current issues == === Capacity limits === thumb|A Line train arriving at 7th Street Metro Center. The line often operates at capacity, and various options to increase capacity have been considered, such as four-car or more frequent trains. Both have problems: it would be difficult or impossible to lengthen some of the station platforms, and the number of trains already causes delays for other vehicles at level crossings. Thus it may not be possible to increase A Line ridership without a costly grade-separation project, either by elevation, by an entrenchment method similar to that used by the nearby Alameda Corridor freight rail "expressway," or by building another parallel transit corridor to relieve capacity strains from the A Line. With the Regional Connector Transit Project linking the A and E Line tracks with the former L Line tracks in Little Tokyo, this may result in even more capacity problems, with ridership expected to grow. Pico station, which is served by both A and E line trains, is a major limiting factor for service frequency. The very busy grade crossing immediately adjacent to the station makes reliably running high-frequency service on both lines logistically very difficult. === Safety at level crossings === thumb|A Metro A Line train heading to Long Beach arrives at Willow station. Over 120 motorists and pedestrians have been killed at A Line level crossings since 1990. There have been more than 800 collisions, making the line easily the country's deadliest and most collision-prone rail line. In 1998, the MTA commissioned Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc. to evaluate the cause of Blue Line collisions and recommend affordable solutions. The study reported the high ridership (over 70,000 per day) was a contributor: Other contributing factors identified were the high population density leading to more pedestrian and vehicular traffic around the tracks, the diverse varied socio-economic community around the line that creates literacy and language difficulties for public education campaigns, driver frustration due to the slow traffic speeds around the line that leads to more risk-taking behavior, and the shared right-of-way with freight traffic in the fastest running section from Washington station to Willow station, where trains operate at a maximum of between stations. The collision rate has declined somewhat following the installation of four-quadrant gates at some crossings where the A Line shares the right-of-way with freight rail between Willowbrook station and Artesia station. The gates prevent drivers from going around lowered gates. In addition, cameras along some problem intersections issue traffic tickets when drivers go around gates. == Operations == On Metro Rail's internal timetables, the A Line is called line 801. Because of the length of the line, operators do not take trains from end to end, swapping out at Union Station. Trains are operated between APU/Citrus College and Union Station by employees based at Division 24 in Monrovia. Between Long Beach and Union Station, operators are based out of Division 11 in Rancho Dominguez. === Maintenance facilities === The A Line is operated out of two divisions, Metro’s term for train maintenance and storage facilities. Division 11 is located at 4350 East 208th Street in Rancho Dominguez between and stations. The facility can house and maintain 86 light rail vehicles and can perform heavy maintenance including repainting. Trains get to this yard via a wye junction on the southbound tracks. Northbound trains can enter and exit the yard via the cross tracks on the north and south side of the junction. Division 24 is located south of the I-210 freeway in Monrovia between and stations. === Rolling stock === thumb|Blue Line train in the 1990s The A Line operates trains with three light rail vehicles on weekdays and two on weekends. The line currently uses three different types of light rail vehicles: the Siemens P2000, the Kinki Sharyo P3010 and the AnsaldoBreda P2550, but has seen every type light rail rolling stock on Metro's roster throughout its history of operation. When the A Line, then known as the Blue Line, first opened in 1990 the line had 54 Nippon Sharyo P865 light rail vehicles, numbered 100–153. These cars wore a unique livery consisting of several blue stripes and a single red stripe, reflecting the Blue Line's color designation and its Pacific Electric Red Car heritage. In 2000, Metro transferred all 15 Nippon Sharyo P2020 (numbered 154-168) light rail vehicles from the Green Line (now the C Line) to the Blue Line fleet. These light rail vehicles were nearly identical to the older P865 model but were about five years newer and originally had equipment for automatic train operation. In 2012, Metro transferred some Siemens P2000 light rail vehicles from the Gold Line to the Blue Line fleet. In 2017, the Blue Line received 78 Kinki Sharyo P3010 light rail vehicles, the first new cars for the line since it opened in 1990. As the P3010 fleet was introduced, Metro gradually retired all of the remaining P865 light rail vehicles, followed by the P2020 fleet. == References == == External links == * Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority * Blue Line homepage * Blue Line schedule * Blue Line connections overview * A History of the Blue Line: A Light Rail Success Story by the Transit Coalition * Killing Time on the Ghetto Blue from the LA Weekly * Delivery of The First Metro Blue Line Vehicle Category:A Line (Los Angeles Metro) Category:Light rail in California Category:Public transportation in Los Angeles Category:Public transportation in Los Angeles County, California Category:Transportation in Long Beach, California Category:South Los Angeles Category:Railway lines opened in 1990 Category:1990 establishments in California