A House Is Not a Home is a 1964 drama film loosely based on the 1953 autobiography by madam Polly Adler. The film stars Shelley Winters, Robert Taylor, Cesar Romero, and Kaye Ballard. Raquel Welch made her film debut in a small role as a call girl. The song written for the film by Burt Bacharach and Hal David has become a standard. ==Plot== Polly Adler is a poor Polish immigrant who works in a sweatshop. She loses her job after she is sexually assaulted by her boss, for which her housemates blame her. She then is forced to move out. Her next apartment is in a building owned by Frank Costigan, a gangster. Frank approves of Polly's attractive girlfriends and pays her to have the ladies go out socially with his friends. One thing leads to another, and soon Polly is the madam of a bordello. She has genuine feelings for musician Casey Booth, but does not reveal her true occupation to him. Costigan becomes the top enforcer for mob boss Lucky Luciano and backs Polly's business, which ends up on Park Avenue offering high-class call girls. Casey proposes marriage, so Polly finally confesses what she does for a living. He is willing to overlook it, but Polly feels it is for the best if they part. ==Cast== Actor Role Shelley Winters Polly Adler Robert Taylor Frank Costigan Cesar Romero Lucky Luciano Ralph Taeger Casey Booth Kaye Ballard Sidonia Broderick Crawford Harrigan Mickey Shaughnessy Police Sgt. Riordan Jesse White Rafferty Lisa Seagram Madge Meri Welles Lorraine Connie Gilchrist Hattie Miller Constance Dane Laura Allyson Ames Gwen Lewis Charles Angelo Steve Peck Vince Roger C. Carmel Dixie Keeler J. Pat O'Malley Muldoon Sandra Grant Call Girl Raquel Welch Call Girl Francine Pyne Red-Call Girl Edy Williams Call Girl Charles Fredericks Bert Danica d'Hondt Vicki ==Award nominations== Edith Head was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Costume Design, Black-and-White. ==External links== * * Category:1964 films Category:1964 drama films Category:American independent films Category:American black-and-white films Category:Drama films based on actual events Category:Films directed by Russell Rouse Category:Films set in New York City Category:Films set in the 1920s Category:Films about prostitution in the United States Category:American drama films Category:Embassy Pictures films Category:1960s English-language films Category:1960s American films Category:English-language drama films