A Fantastic Woman () is a 2017 drama film directed by Sebastián Lelio, written by Lelio and Gonzalo Maza. Produced by Juan de Dios and Pablo Larraín, the film stars Daniela Vega and Francisco Reyes. It won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 90th Oscars and competed for the Golden Bear at the 67th Berlin International Film Festival. ==Plot== Marina is a young transgender woman living in Santiago, Chile. She works as a singer and a waitress and is in a relationship with an older man named Orlando. They have recently moved in together, and on Marina's birthday, Orlando gives her a note promising tickets to a famous resort as a gift. However, Orlando wakes up in the middle of the night feeling unwell and stumbles down a flight of stairs. Marina takes him to the hospital, but he dies of a brain aneurysm. Marina contacts Orlando's brother, Gabo, and is later picked up by the police. The officers call her 'sir' after checking her old ID card and demand an explanation for her sudden departure from the hospital. Gabo arrives and speaks to Marina with enough familiarity to convince the police of her innocence. He lets her take Orlando's car home. Orlando's ex-wife, Sonia, contacts Marina to arrange a time for her to drop off Orlando's car. While working, Marina is visited by a detective named Adriana, who works on cases that include sexual assault. Adriana suggests that Orlando was paying Marina as a sex worker rather than the two dating. She also thinks Marina may have caused Orlando's bruises while defending herself from a violent encounter. Marina returns home, where she is comforted by Orlando's dog, Diabla. Orlando's son, Bruno, arrives and harasses Marina with personal questions. He decides to take the dog despite Marina's protestations. Marina takes the car to be washed and "sees" Orlando, which disturbs her. She then meets Sonia in a car park and hands over the car. Sonia becomes upset and asks Marina to hand over the flat as soon as possible. She tells Marina not to go to the funeral. Gabo calls Marina and tells her that Orlando will be cremated, and he wants her to have some of the ashes. Marina prepares to move out of Orlando's apartment and attends the wake. Upon her arrival, Sonia demands that Marina leave, and Gabo follows her out and apologizes. Later, Bruno and his friends accost Marina, threatening and wrapping her face in scotch tape before leaving her in an alleyway. Marina then walks to a gay club where she meets a man and spends the night with Wanda and Gastón. The next day, Marina discovers the details of Orlando's funeral in the newspaper. Wanda and Gastón warn her to let it go, but she decides to visit a sauna where Orlando had left a numbered key. She nervously enters the sauna and books in before locating the lockers and opening Orlando's, only to find it empty. After the funeral ceremony, Marina is confronted by Orlando's family who insult her, prompting her to climb on top of their car and demand her dog back. She follows an employee into the morgue and sees Orlando's body before his cremation. In the final scene, Marina is seen running with Diabla and later singing an opera recital to a packed audience. ==Cast== * Daniela Vega as Marina Vidal * Francisco Reyes as Orlando Onetto Partier * Luis Gnecco as Gabriel Onetto Partier * Aline Küppenheim as Sonia Bunster * Amparo Noguera as Adriana Cortés * Nicolás Saavedra as Bruno Onetto Bunster * Antonia Zegers as Alessandra * Trinidad González as Wanda Vidal * Néstor Cantillana as Gastón * Alejandro Goic as Doctor * Sergio Hernández as piano teacher * Roberto Farías as medic in SML * Marcial Tagle as Orlando's relative * Pablo Cerda as Pablo * Erto Pantoja as police man * Paola Lattus as nurse ==Release== Larraín, Vega, Lelio, Reyes at the 2017 Berlin Film Festival|thumb A Fantastic Woman premiered at the 67th Berlin International Film Festival on 12 February 2017. The movie won the Silver Bear for Best Screenplay and the Teddy Award, which is given to films with an LGBT theme. Two days prior to the premiere, Sony Pictures Classics acquired the distribution rights for the film. ==Reception== The film holds a 94% approval rating on review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 221 reviews, with an average rating of 8.10/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Subtle and tender, A Fantastic Woman handles its timely, sensitive subject matter with care." It holds a score of 86 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 43 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". Chilean LBGTQ activists used A Fantastic Woman's Oscar win to accelerate local discussions on a gender identity bill. Subsequently, Chile approved laws allowing transgender citizens to change their official details in late 2018. According to political scientists Carsten-Andreas Schulz and Cameron G. Thies, the international recognition of the film temporarily made support for trans rights a matter of national pride in Chile, which opened a window of opportunity for the approval of the law. ==Accolades== A Fantastic Woman received a nomination for Best Foreign Language Film at the 90th Academy Awards, and became the first Chilean film to win the award in this category. It was the second Chilean film to win an Oscar, after Bear Story in 2016. Award Date of ceremony Category Recipients Result Academy Awards 4 March 2018 Best Foreign Language Film A Fantastic Woman Ariel Awards 5 June 2018 Best Ibero-American Film A Fantastic Woman Belgian Film Critics Association 7 January 2018 Grand Prix A Fantastic Woman Berlin International Film Festival 18 February 2017 Teddy Award – Best Feature Film Sebastián Lelio Silver Bear for Best Screenplay Sebastián Lelio and Gonzalo Maza Golden Bear Sebastián Lelio Cabourg Film Festival 18 June 2017 Grand Jury Prize Sebastián Lelio Critics' Choice Movie Awards 11 January 2018 Best Foreign Language Film A Fantastic Woman Dorian Awards 31 January 2018 Best Foreign Language Film A Fantastic Woman Best Actress Daniela Vega Best LGBTQ Film A Fantastic Woman Best Rising Star Daniela Vega GLAAD Media Awards 12 April 2018 Outstanding Film – Limited Release A Fantastic Woman Golden Globe Award 7 January 2018 Best Foreign Language Film A Fantastic Woman Goya Awards 3 February 2018 Best Iberoamerican Film A Fantastic Woman Havana Film Festival 15 December 2017 Special Jury Prize A Fantastic Woman Best Actress Daniela Vega Unete- United Nations Prize A Fantastic Woman Independent Spirit Awards 3 March 2018 Best International Film A Fantastic Woman National Board of Review 28 November 2017 Top Five Foreign Language Films A Fantastic Woman Palm Springs International Film Festival 13 January 2018 Honorable Mention Cine Latino Jury A Fantastic Woman Best Actress in a Foreign Language Film Daniela Vega Platino Awards 29 April 2018 Best Film A Fantastic Woman Best Director Sebastián Lelio Best Actress Daniela Vega Best Screenplay Sebastián Lelio and Gonzalo Maza Best Film Editing Soledad Salfate Best Cinematography Benjamín Echazarreta Best Art Direction Estefanía Larraín Best Sound Tina Laschke Film and Education Values A Fantastic Woman ==See also== * List of submissions to the 90th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film * List of Chilean submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film ==References== ==External links== * * * Category:2017 films Category:2017 drama films Category:2017 LGBT-related films Category:2010s Spanish-language films Category:American drama films Category:American LGBT-related films Category:Best Foreign Language Film Academy Award winners Category:Chilean drama films Category:Chilean LGBT-related films Category:Films about gender Category:Films about trans women Category:Films directed by Sebastián Lelio Category:Films set in Chile Category:Films shot in Chile Category:German drama films Category:German LGBT-related films Category:Independent Spirit Award for Best Foreign Film winners Category:LGBT-related drama films Category:Spanish drama films Category:Spanish LGBT-related films Category:Films scored by Matthew Herbert Category:Sony Pictures Classics films Category:Films about singers Category:2010s American films Category:2010s German films Category:2010s Chilean films Category:2010s Spanish films