A Hero () is a 2021 Iranian-French drama film written and directed by Asghar Farhadi. Starring Amir Jadidi, Mohsen Tanabandeh and Sahar Goldoost. In June 2021, the film was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or. At the 2021 Cannes Film Festival, the film won the Grand Prix. It was selected as the Iranian entry for the Best International Feature Film at the 94th Academy Awards, and was one of the 15 shortlisted films in the category but was not nominated. == Plot == Rahim Soltani is temporarily released from prison for a two-day period in order to settle an unpaid debt of 150,000,000 tomans to his brother-in-law, Bahram. Rahim’s lover, Farkondeh, has acquired a lost handbag containing several gold coins, which they both attempt to sell in order to repay the debt, but find that gold has lost value to the point where Rahim cannot repay Bahram in full. In the meantime, he moves in with his sister Malileh and her husband Hossein. Malileh discovers the handbag and coins and confronts Rahim about it, leading Rahim to pursue the original owner of the handbag and return it to them. After the original owner comes to claim the bag (which Rahim claims he found), Rahim is praised for his selfless act and his story is covered by the media before he returns to prison and becomes a local celebrity. Bahram is immediately suspicious of Rahim’s story, believing he is trying to restore his image and leave prison to stop the impending second marriage of his ex-wife. The prison begins to arrange for Rahim’s release. At a charity event to raise money and provide employment for Rahim, Bahram is incensed to learn that less than a quarter of the debt’s total has been raised. He explains to the organizers that Rahim, then unable to take out a loan from a bank, received the money from Bahram that he acquired from a loan shark, who he eventually had to repay when Rahim failed to make payments. Despite this, Bahram agrees to have Rahim released for the sake of his estranged son, Siavash. While applying for his new job, Rahim learns that rumors have begun to spread disputing his supposed discovery and returning of the handbag, prompting Rahim to locate the woman in order for her to confirm his story, though his search is fruitless. Rahim and Malileh plot to have Farkondeh pose as the woman, using details from the actual encounter to validate Rahim’s story. The hiring manager produces a text from Rahim to Bahram offering to pay half the debt a week before the day he claimed to have found the bag, leading him to reject Rahim’s application. Certain that Bahram forwarded the incriminating text exchange, Rahim confronts him at his printing shop, but Bahram denies it. After Bahram accuses Rahim of using his son for sympathy, Rahim physically attacks him, and nearby shopkeepers help restrain Rahim while the police arrive. Farkondeh arrives and manages to convince Bahram to let Rahim go. Rahim is called by the charity organization to inform him of a video made by Bahram’s daughter Nazanin, which shows footage of his fight with Bahram while also unveiling his and Farkondeh’s relationship. Nazanin threatens to release the video publicly if Rahim doesn’t pay his debt in full by the next day. In light of this evidence, Rahim is forced to unveil the truth about the bag. Fearing a scandal, the organization decides to withhold the money raised for Rahim. On the last day of his leave, Rahim is informed by the charity organizer that the funds raised for him will instead be used toward the release of a man scheduled to be executed, and Farkondeh convinces her to tell the media that it was Rahim’s idea in order to help him retain some of his honor. Nazanin’s video is released, and Farkondeh’s family forbids her from seeing Rahim again. While filming a video about Rahim’s most recent “act” of charity to soften the backlash, Siavash is coached into crying on camera by Rahim’s parole officer, Salehi, and Rahim, wanting to protect his son, relents and wishes for the video to not be released. When Salehi refuses, Rahim fights him outside until he eventually deletes it. The following morning, Farkondeh and Siavash accompany Rahim back to prison to serve the remainder of his sentence. ==Cast== * Amir Jadidi as Rahim * Mohsen Tanabandeh as Bahram * Sahar Goldoost as Farkhondeh * Fereshteh Sadr Orafaie as Mrs. Radmehr * Sarina Farhadi as Nazanin ==Production== Memento Films shopped the rights to the script by Farhadi during the 2020 European Film Market in Berlin. The film entered pre-production in June 2020 and filmed through December 2020. Production took place in Shiraz. In April 2021, it was revealed that Amazon Studios had acquired rights to distribute the film in the United States. ==Release== The film had its premiere at 2021 Cannes Film Festival on 13 July 2021, as it was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or at the festival. It is also selected as closing film of the 52nd International Film Festival of India to be screened on 28 November 2021. == Legal disputes == A Hero was inspired by the story of Mohammad Reza Shokri, a man who returned a bag of cash he found while on a leave from a debtors' prison in Shiraz, although Farhadi has stated in interviews that it "was not inspired by a specific news item". Azadeh Masihzadeh made a documentary about Shokri from 2014 to 2015, when she attended a workshop taught by Farhadi on documentary filmmaking at the Karnameh Institute in Tehran. In the course, Farhadi assigned his students to research and film a documentary about people who had found and returned valuable objects to their original owners. According to Masihzadeh, while most students in the class took subjects from a list of excerpts from news media Farhadi provided them with, she decided to work in her hometown of Shiraz to save expenses, and an acquaintance told her that she saw a news story about Shokri on local television. Masihzadeh then went to a local newspaper and the TV station that aired the news, obtained permission to film in prison, and met Shokri. Farhadi saw rushes and gave her notes at five sessions over six months. Five projects in the workshop, including Masihzadeh's, were to be consolidated into one film, with Farhadi's involvement obscured so as not to raise too much expectation. Masihzadeh obtained permission from Farhadi to screen her film by itself. Under the title All Winners, All Losers, the film screened at the Shiraz Arts Festival in 2018, where it won the Special Jury Prize. Later, Masihzadeh was told that the collective film had finally been completed and that her segment would not be included if she continued screening her film. With the understanding that Farhadi's name would appear in the credits, she agreed to withdraw her film from festivals. In August 2019, when Masihzadeh was enrolled in a screenwriting workshop by Farhadi at the Bamdad Institute in Tehran, Farhadi asked Masihzadeh to sign a document stating that the idea for All Winners, All Losers belonged to Farhadi. In the presence of Parisa Bakhtavar, his wife and director of the institute, and secretary Farideh Shafiei, Masihzadeh obliged, which she has since said she did under pressure. A lawyer for Memento Films, the French producer and distributor of A Hero, later pointed out that the document had no legal value as "ideas and concepts are not protected by copyright". In late 2020, Masihzadeh learned that Farhadi was making a film in Shiraz, and tried, in vain, to contact him in the city. After learning the plot of A Hero when it was announced to be in Cannes competition, Masihzadeh sent five people to watch the film at Cannes and report back. She estimated a 70% resemblance based on their report and began posting similarities they spotted on Instagram under the hashtag #a_hero. In September 2021, Masihzadeh's lawyer sent Farhadi a message stating that her intellectual property rights had been violated and requesting "dialogue and negotiation". A month later, a meeting was held at the , where Farhadi's lawyer told Masihzadeh that she had committed the crime of defamation and that a complaint would be filed against her if she did not delete her Instagram posts. Another meeting took place two days later, this time with Farhadi in attendance, and he accused Masihzadeh of lying and being ungrateful. Farhadi offered to mention her in the end credits as a researcher and pay her roughly $1,600, while she requested that opening credits state A Hero was based on her film and that she share in the film's revenue. The House of Cinema's arbitration council issued a decision concluding that Masihzadeh's claim was false. In early November 2021, Farhadi filed a criminal complaint with the , accusing Masihzadeh of defamation and spreading misinformation. On November 30, 2021, Masihzadeh filed a counterclaim, accusing Farhadi of plagiarism, intellectual property theft, and "illegitimate gains by fraud or abuse of privilege". In January 2022, Farhadi filed another complaint accusing Masihzadeh of defamation and misinformation, in regard to her claim that she was coerced to sign a statement. Masihzadeh claimed that she discovered the story herself and that it had not been reported in national media at the time, while Farhadi's lawyer argued that the story had already been reported in media. The manager of the workshop has told media that she shares Masihzadeh's recollection. A fellow student who attended the workshop also testified in support of Masihzadeh in court, while some other students have signed a statement in support of Farhadi denying the allegation. Masihzadeh faced up to one year in prison or 74 lashes, though corporal punishment is rare for first offenders and the prison time may be avoided by paying fines. Masihzadeh found 56 similarities between her film and A Hero, 49 of which had not been reported in the press, such as the original owner of the money discovering the notice at a bank, her husband's unawareness of the loss of the money, and prison staff's improved treatment of Shokri after he returned the money. In March 2022, the magistrate for the case issued an opinion finding merit in Masihzadeh's claims, and indicted Farhadi and referred the case to a criminal court, while dismissing Farhadi's complaints and Masizadeh's claim to revenue. On 4 April 2022, The Hollywood Reporter erroneously reported that Farhadi had been convicted, which he could not appeal, only to issue a correction stating that he had been merely indicted and that the case would now move to a second judge, whose ruling may still be appealed. Farhadi has denied the charges in the criminal proceedings. In November 2021, Masihzadeh met Shokri in prison in Shiraz and, with permission, took him to a screening of A Hero, which she had bought out. Shokri saw the film in shackles and handcuffed. He was particularly offended by the film's inclusion of the protagonist's son with stuttering, as he had a brother who had difficulty speaking, who had died after the making of the documentary and whom Shokri had asked Masihzadeh not to film so as not to arouse pity. Shokri filed a complaint against Farhadi for defamation and revelation of personal information, among other charges, stating that he had granted Masihzadeh an exclusive permission to depict his story. The magistrate dismissed the complaint. == Reception == === Critical response === === Accolades === Year Award Category Nominated Result 2021 Cannes Film Festival Palme d'Or Asghar Farhadi Grand Prix François Chalais Prize 2021 Asia Pacific Screen Awards Best Feature Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi Achievement in Directing Asghar Farhadi Best Screenplay Asghar Farhadi Best Actor Amir Jadidi 2021 Valladolid International Film Festival Best Film Asghar Farhadi 2021 Montclair Film Festival Narrative Feature Competition Asghar Farhadi 2021 Santa Fe Independent Film Festival Best Narrative Feature Asghar Farhadi 2021 Hafez Awards Best Motion Picture Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi Best Director – Motion Picture Asghar Farhadi Best Screenplay – Motion Picture Asghar Farhadi Best Actor – Motion Picture Amir Jadidi Mohsen Tanabandeh Best Actress – Motion Picture Sahar Goldoost Best Cinematography – Motion Picture Ali Ghazi Best Editor – Motion Picture Hayedeh Safiyari 2021 Satellite Awards Best Original Screenplay Asghar Farhadi Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 Chicago Film Critics Association Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 IndieWire Critics Poll Best Screenplay Asghar Farhadi Best International Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 Las Vegas Film Critics Society Awards Best International Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 National Board of Review Best Original Screenplay Asghar Farhadi Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 North Texas Film Critics Association Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 St. Louis Film Critics Association Best International Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 Utah Film Critics Association Awards Best Non-English Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2021 Washington DC Area Film Critics Association Awards Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Palm Springs International Film Festival Bridging the Borders Award Asghar Farhadi FIPRESCI Prize for Best International Feature Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi FIPRESCI Prize for Best International Screenplay Asghar Farhadi FIPRESCI Prize for Best Actor in an International Feature Film Amir Jadidi 2022 Chicago Indie Critics Awards (CIC) Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi Best Original Screenplay Asghar Farhadi 2022 Denver Film Critics Society Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Columbus Film Critics Association Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Alliance of Women Film Journalists Best Non-English Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Critics' Choice Movie Awards Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Golden Globe Awards Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 San Francisco Bay Area Film Critics Circle Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Hollywood Critics Association Best International Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 North Carolina Film Critics Association Best Foreign Language Film Alexandre Mallet Guy and Asghar Farhadi 2022 Iranian Cinema Directors' Great Celebration Best Film Director Asghar Farhadi ==See also== * List of submissions to the 94th Academy Awards for Best International Feature Film * List of Iranian submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film ==References== ==External links== * * * * Official Screenplay * Category:2021 films Category:2021 drama films Category:Films directed by Asghar Farhadi Category:Iranian drama films Category:2020s Persian-language films Category:French drama films Category:Cannes Grand Prix winners Category:Films involved in plagiarism controversies Category:2020s French films