A Kind of Spark is a middle grade novel by Elle McNicoll, published on 4 June 2020, by Knights Of Media. The book follows Addie, "an autistic 11-year-old [who] seeks to memorialize the women once tried as witches in her Scottish village." The book was commissioned as a CBBC television adaptation, with McNicoll acting as head writer for the series == Reception == A Kind of Spark was generally well-received, including a starred review from School Library Journal. Kirkus Reviews called the book "[e]arnest and perceptive," noting, "The bullying Addie endures will leave readers’ stomachs in sympathetic knots, but Addie's nuanced relationships with her sisters and a new friend, Audrey, infuse humor and heart." Publishers Weekly applauded the representation of Addie's autism, stating, "McNicoll, herself neurodivergent, portrays with clarity Addie’s neurological reality, interpersonal bonds, and thoughtful reflections." Deborah Stevenson, writing for The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, echoed the sentiment, writing, "McNicoll ... writes Addie’s narration with power and determination; it’s especially strong at revealing the sheer labor required for Addie to negotiate the world ... and the toll it takes, which is evident in Keedie as well." Stevenson concluded, "Whether they’re facing similar neurodivergent challenges or not, readers will appreciate Addie’s honesty, and they may follow her lead in reconsidering history." Awards Year Award/Honor Result Ref. 2020 Blackwell's Book of the Year 2021 Blue Peter Book Award for Best story Waterstones Children's Book Prize for Overall Waterstones Children's Book Prize for Younger Readers Saltire Society Literary Award for Scottish First Book of the Year 2022 Schneider Family Book Award for Middle Grades ==Television series== A Kind of Spark was optioned for a CBBC television adaptation, with McNicoll acting as head writer for the series. It premiered in the UK on 31 March 2023, first on BBC iPlayer and later on CBBC. == References == Category:2020 children's books Category:21st-century American literature Category:Books about autism Category:English-language literature Category:Novels set in Scotland Category:Children's books set in Scotland